In the last series of videos in this section,
we've discussed the static nested class and the inner member class.
The static nested class is declared within an enclosing class
but is relatively independent of the enclosing class.
The inner member class is a class member
(meaning it's inherited by subclasses)
and is tightly integrated with the enclosing class,
having access to its enclosing classes instant attributes,
and access to all methods in the closing class and its parent classes.
In this video, I want to start out by discussing a local class.
A local class is not a member of an enclosing class,
but it's declared in a block of code and is typically part of a method body,
but could also be in any block of code such as a for-loop block,
a switch statement,
and if clause or exception clause.
The local class is like a local variable and does not exist
until the code block or method body is executed
and ceases to exist when the block completes.
It's a disposable and convenient mechanism
for the storage of multiple variables
packaged with some desired behavior for the variables.
All right, so let's swing back to our IDE,
and what we're going to do is create a new class in the Fundamentals project we've been using.
We're going to call this one local class example, no package name.
Paste in some code.
All right, so the code I've pasted in starts with a declaration of a public class,
the local class example we created which has got two methods.
methodWithLocalClass as you can see on screen there.
Well, that's got a public method.
You can see that up there on line 23 – performSomeAction -
that just prints the name of the class.
We've got a constructor there
which is one argument or has one argument of top string.
There's also a field there named name,
which the constructor sets to the string passed to it.
And scrolling on down, you can see we're creating multiple instances
of the local class within the enclosing code scope,
and then we're executing some methods on instances of the local class as well,
then we're just accessing a field directly
from an instance of the local class on line 41.
All right, then the second method in our local class example class
is just the static main method,
which basically invokes the method with the local class method.
All right, so if we run this now,
you can see the output, and specifically that's demonstrating that you can create a class
in a block of code as we've done,
and then immediately create instances of that class and use them,
and that's the code there within the method with local class method.
All right, so let's make some changes now to this local class
and what we're going to do is make the field name private.
We're also going to make the constructor private
and lastly, the performSomeAction method private.
All right, so we'll run that.
And you can see that the code compiled
and also ran just the same as before,
so nothing is really private from the enclosing codes point of view.
But what about the other way around?
Our instance and local variables in the enclosing code
available to the inner local class.
Well, let's test that.
So, I'm going to create a private instance variable
in our local class example class, private String
defaultName,
and set that equal to “Jane” in double-quotes because it's a string obviously.
All right, then in the constructor for our local class, let's try and use that.
So, I'm going to put it within this, the first line if parentheses name
is equal to null,
then we're going to add a code block of this.name
equals defaultName, defaultName coming from the outer class,
and we'll put an else around the other code in here.
All right, so we're testing what the names nullified is.
We're using the default name from the outer class.
The main class defined there on line 8 or specifically,
the default name variable on line 10.
And now that we've done that, we need some code to test this with a null argument.
So, let's do that right down here.
Paste in the code
you can see we're creating a new instance of the local class with a no
no argument.
We'll run it and see what happens.
And you can see that last line of output LocalClass.name equals Jane.
So, specifically, what we've confirmed here
is that a local class does have access to attributes of the enclosing class,
including private ones.
All right, so moving on, what about local variables declared in the method?
SO, let's go up to our method declaration at the top here,
methodWithLocalClass.
And we're going to add
string or define a string variable, string defaultName
equals “Ralph”.
Obviously, that's the local variable in the method with local class,
so what's going to happen when we execute that code.
So again, looking at line 26, that's using the variable default name from the code.
This time we can see the output, LocalClass.name equals Ralph.
That's showing that the local class used the methods local variable
as the default name, in this case,
ralph instead of Jane that we saw previously before making this change.
So, you are allowed to use local variables
from the enclosing code segment if they are effectively final.
Meaning that they do not change once their values are set,
either inside the local class or out.
So in other words, if you insert the word final in the declaration
and the code compiles.
So, let's change the method enclosing the local class slightly.
So, what I'm going to do is, up here where we've defined the
default name variable in the method, the local variable,
the next line, we are going to put if parentheses
this.defaultName is not equal to null.
Then, what we're going to do is set default name equal to
this.defaultName.
Now, you can see by doing that, we've got a compiler error.
If we come over here and click on it, we can see that variable
default name is accessed from within the inner class.
So, specifically, that error is in the constructor as you can see there.
By adding the change that we just made the local variable
default name is no longer effectively final,
and the compiler won't let you reference it in the local class as we're attempting to do.
So, let's undo that change.
And obviously, the area disappears and we can run it again
and get the output Ralph on the last line there.
All right, so just some other points about a local class.
A local class can extend other classes and implement interfaces.
A local class cannot though have static members.
So, let's test that. We want to actually add some static members and see what happens.
Like I brought down here before the end of the class definition,
paste some code in and you can see we've got some errors there right away.
Inner classes cannot have static declarations.
They're basically the same compiler error for all three there.
All right, so I'll undo that again. Let's try the same thing but for enums.
Paste in some more code. Well, actually enum and an interface.
Same thing there, enum - inner classes come out of static declarations,
likewise for an interface.
Now, these are less obvious violations.
A nested name is implied to be static
and therefore cannot be a member of a local class or an inner class.
Now an interface is also implicitly static.
The compiler error for this depending on your version may be less specific.
Here it actually just says the inner classes can have static declarations,
it may state the interface not allowed here.
We saw this pop up in the inner nested class example
in a previous video in this section as well.
A local class has the same restrictions as an inner nested class.
Undo those changes.
All right, next, let's try and add an attribute to the local class example
and we'll see why shortly.
So, go back up to local class example.
So, add this below the definition on line 10.
So, we're going to do a private string,
lastName is equal to “Doe”.
And we'll change our constructor in our local class
outside of the else. What I'm going to do there is put
this.name
plus equals a space in double-quotes, in other words, plus lastName.
Now if we run this code,
you can see that we've got the result, Ralph Doe,
down the bottom there, and that demonstrates again that the local class
also has access to the enclosing classes attributes.
Now, we can go back to the constructor and add this qualifier to the reference.
So instead of this.name plus equals a space in double-quotes plus name,
we'll put this.lastName.
Noticing now that's a compiler error.
You cannot resolve symbol in last name.
Using this in the context of a local class constructor
refers to an instance of the local class only.
To access last name with a more specific qualifier
for readability or if an attribute was shadowed,
we use this construct that I'm going to type in, so instead of this.lastName,
we have to use localClassName being the name of the class
.this.lastName.
And would help if I typed it correctly.
All right, no compiler errors and we run it
and we get the expected output.
All right, so let's finish the video here.
In the next one, I want to explore some different ways
of creating local classes.
See you in the next video.